---
layout: post
title: To Love Life is to Love Others
date:   2014-01-30
description: 
---
To Love Life is to Love Others


Is there meaning to life if it is devoid of love? Compassion is selfless love that is hardest to give but more rewarding than any other type of love. Compassion is not just love for another; it is a willingness to suffer with another through all of that person’s hardship. Endo’s three novels, The Sea and Poison, Wonderful Fool and Volcano discuss compassion by showing the reader situations where it is non-existent, omnipresent and where it struggles to survive. This multi-faceted commentary on compassion characterizes compassion as attainable by all but out of reach for many and shows that compassionate love is the source of true heartfelt satisfaction and joy in life.
Compassion is benevolent and active love for others. It literally means “suffering-with;” by its nature it implies action. In Wonderful Fool, Gaston Bonaparte is compassionate towards everyone he encounters including a murderer and a decrepit dog. He does not abandon those that need him. He leaves Takamori and Tomoe because they do not need his love, and when he finds Endo suffering he cannot abandon him. Endo writes that Gaston felt a deep compassion for the killer Endo that could not be called “‘friendship’ or ‘affection’ but was more like the feeling he had had for the stray dog” (128). Gaston understands Endo’s suffering and bears that suffering with him. That is compassion.
In sharp contrast with the active love of Gaston, the characters of The Sea and Poison are apathetic and devoid of love. Suguro witnesses the vivisection of an American prisoner of war and does nothing. He is plagued by moral guilt following the operation, but his suffering is of self-loathing and pity; it is not compassion. Suguro says to himself, “You’re always there, not doing anything at all!” (150). He suffers with no one but himself. He cannot love others if he does not make the movements of love.
In one case Nurse Ueda makes an action that feigns compassion when she attempts to kill a suffering female patient. She asks, “Can’t you help a person by letting them die easier?” (98). The actions she makes are not to suffering-with; they are for an end to suffering. The foreign woman, Hilda immediately disparages her for her misunderstanding of compassion. Compassion involves taking another’s burdens upon oneself, not eliminating the burdens out of pity.
In Volcano, compassion in Kagoshima is dormant like the volcano, Akadake. Jinpei Suda makes no effort to deeply love others, he “had learned that mediocrity was the secret to contentment” (28). All that he has passion for is the volcano Akadake and for this he is referred to as “The Demon” (117). Like a demon, he spreads no love. The apostate priest, Durand, is active, but only in condemning the capability of the Japanese of accepting Christ’s love (127). He suffers from his antipathy for those who can love because he cannot. The only character that shows love is Father Ginzo Sato. He cares for his parishioners in the priestly manner similar to how a shepherd cares for his sheep but he does not lay down his life and suffer with them. There is a difference between a caring person and a compassionate person and Sato represents the former. He may help them, but he does not love them compassionately. Compassionate love is an active, interpersonal affair that transcends contentment and caring.
One cannot truly love one’s neighbor with self-gratification as one’s goal. The only character in any of these novels who displays truly selfless love is Gaston Bonaparte. Gaston is completely disinterested in his own safety, self-image and happiness. He only wants to help others and take on their burdens. When Gaston loses track of Endo and realizes that he must follow him to Yamagata City, he admits that he is afraid (172). Tomoe calls him a fool for thinking of following Endo. What Tomoe cannot understand is that Gaston’s compassion will lead him where he is in the most danger and is most afraid to go. She criticizes him for not having any common sense and says, “Can he possibly realize what a desperate character Endo is?” (172). In her eyes Endo is someone to fear, but in Gaston’s compassionate eyes Endo is someone to love. If love cannot endure in this cold society, Gaston is a fool for loving.
In The Sea and Poison, a stark lack of compassion leads characters to extreme moral guilt. The characters not only put their own lives above the lives of others, they put the ideals of their nation above them. Dr. Toda tells Suguro, “Killing a patient isn’t so solemn a matter as all that. It’s nothing new in the world of medicine. That’s how we’ve made our progress!” (51). Progress trumps human life. This is the opposite of compassionate action. These doctors do not suffer with others, they cause others to suffer so that they can gain prestige and their country can advance. This progress-centered mentality is a viral one that can only be healed by compassionate interveners like Gaston. 
In Volcano, personal pride and social standing outweigh love for others. Durand struggles with his dispassionate nature when in reflection he says, “How difficult it is for a man in his conscience to discern true benevolence from his lust for controlling the lives of others” (60). This dilemma plagues Durand and Suda because as they reach the ends of their lives they both realize that their lives lacked true benevolence. Durand admits that the action that resulted in his apostasy, when he took in the widowed doctor, was done out of smugness (58). Only after years of torment does he realize that this one act, which he thought was selfless, was done for his own gratification. 
Although he was passionate about his career and appearance, Suda never deeply loved anyone but himself. “[Jinpei] was always far more preoccupied with keeping up appearance than with feelings of his wife or son or daughter-in-law” (102). Even Sato, the good country priest, does not show selfless love. When he dutifully visits Durand in the hospital Endo writes, “The joyous satisfaction of contemplating his own unselfish deed began to suffuse the heart of Father Ginzo Sato” (43). The irony is that he believes his deed to be unselfish while he revels in joyous satisfaction for himself! This may be kindness, but it is not compassion. Compassionate people do not love for their own sake. 
Anyone can be compassionate, even the weak or ordinary. In Wonderful Fool, Gaston Bonaparte never stops spreading his selfless love. Gaston has no redeeming qualities; he is horse-faced, foreign, stupid and clumsy. Endo writes, “It must be possible even for weak and pitiful creatures--like [Gaston] and this old dog--to make some contribution in their lifetime” (73). What they can do is spread compassion. Takamori later admits that, “Only to know that there are still men like [Gaston] in the world has been enough to give me a new view of life” (173). Just to keep love alive is a profound cause.
In Endo’s short story, Despicable Bastard a boy named Egi reluctantly visits a leper colony and finds himself in a baseball pickle in which he will unavoidably be touched by a leper, something he fears greatly. The leper is, in the eyes of society, a pitiful creature. Yet, he is compassionate. He tells Egi not to worry; he won’t touch him (41). He is compassionate and he suffers with Egi, who should be compassionate towards the leper. For this Egi labels himself a despicable bastard. He is a wretched specimen of mankind to despise someone who needs his love and is compassionate towards him.
The most compassionate character in Volcano is a homey local preacher. Father Ginzo Sato has never doubted his faith or undergone spiritual crises. However, he is able to care for others in a way that no other character in the story can. Unlike Durand who was a foreign missionary--a specialist--Sato is a simple Japanese priest. He is more capable of love than Durand.
Akadake may symbolize compassion among the people of Kagoshima. If so, the constant, single stream of smoke it emits serves as manifestation of the gentle love that exists in the relationship between Sato and his parishioners. There is not enough compassion present that the mountain erupts, but Sato’s care maintains some warmth that keeps the mountain from dying and the town from plunging into utter animosity.
Without compassion life can be woeful and full of regrets. In The Sea and Poison Endo shows through the lives of Nurse Ueda, Dr. Toda and Dr. Suguro what impact a lack of compassion can have on one’s life. After the vivisection, Toda contemplates the horror of his actions and says to himself, “I have no conscience, I suppose. Not just me, though. None of them feel anything at all about what they did here” (157). Toda has no conscience and no ability to love. He does not suffer because he does not care. However, Suguro does have a conscience and can never live an ordinary life again; he cannot even look his patients in the face (159). There is a passage in which Mitsu Abe reads to a patient from a Buddhist text, “Know that you are suffering so terribly all by yourself because you failed to care for others before” (136). This embodies the guilt that plagues men of conscience, like Suguro, when their lives lack compassion. Ueda’s life is enshrouded in darkness and surrounded by a black sea. Her situation is that of “being dragged through the middle of a dark ocean” (96). Without compassion there is no light and no love.        
Like The Sea and Poison the world of Volcano is a shadowy one with little compassion to shine through the darkness. Dark purple clouds and smoke enshroud the city. “The sea was calm, but it was darkening like the city. Akadake from beyond the bay had turned to deep purple” (45). This is the ominous shadow that embodies the anxiety and indifference of the people of Kagoshima. This shadow spreads through Jinpei. “He could not hide entirely the dark cloud of anxiety that spread within him” (77). He is anxious that the mountain will erupt and betray his life’s efforts. Moreover he is coming to the realization that his life’s toil was meaningless; it is the darkness of a long life without compassion. One of the only places not affected by dark cloud imagery is the St. Teresa retreat built by Father Sato. Sato might have, “Led [Durand] to St. Theresa’s Villa, where in nature’s serene pure air he would try to straighten out the kinks in Durand’s soul” (166). Unfortunately Durand never is purified and his life ends in a dark, dispassionate gloom. 
Compassion is the way to a wholesome and satisfying life. Gaston’s compassion changes the lives of the people he encounters for the better. Gaston becomes the best part of Takamori and Tomoe’s lives. Gaston knows that “even a weakling like himself, if he were wholly alive, if he made full use of the life that was in him, should be able to snatch for himself a fragment of the beauty of the stars” (74). Gaston lives with the beauty of the stars inside of him because he makes full use of his life for the benefit of others. Compassion is what makes Gaston’s life bright and lack of compassion is what makes the lives of many of these characters dark and resentful.
Those that lack compassion have regrets, moral dilemmas and darkness in their lives. Those who are compassionate, like Gaston, can live in joy through their suffering-with others. One does not have to be intellectual, prosperous or handsome to be compassionate. In Wonderful Fool, compassion is embodied in Gaston, the reject and the fool. Of the murderous medical officials of The Sea and Poison some lack conscience, but those few with consciences suffer from their lack of love for their fellow man. In Volcano, Suda and Durand discover that what was missing from their lives was compassion for others and by the time they realize this it is too late to escape their fates. Compassion is the selfless love that unites man to save him from wretched turmoil. 

